How-to for native CAPI providers (#2251)
rancher/rancher-docs: docs/how-to-guides/advanced-user-guides/capi-infrastructure-providers.md

---
title: Tech preview - configure native CAPI infrastructure providers to provision RKE2 clusters
---

:::caution

Using native CAPI infrastructure providers is an experimental feature in Rancher 2.14, made available as a tech preview for evaluation. It should not be used for production clusters, and some configuration fields are subject to change. Future versions of this feature may be incompatible with this version.

Cluster API infrastructure providers have many configuration options for setting up credentials and creating resources in the cloud provider.

This guide provides simple examples for evaluating this provisioning mode. Refer to the documentation of each provider for more details on these options and adapt these examples to your needs.

:::

## Overview

> Rancher 2.14 can provision RKE2 clusters using native CAPI infrastructure providers, such as [CAPA](https://cluster-api-aws.sigs.k8s.io/) (Cluster API Provider AWS) and [CAPV](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-vsphere) (Cluster API Provider vSphere).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rancher v2.14.0 can provision RKE2 clusters using native CAPI infrastructure providers, such as [CAPA](https://cluster-api-aws.sigs.k8s.io/) (Cluster API Provider AWS) and [CAPV](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-vsphere) (Cluster API Provider vSphere).
```

Standard RKE2 provisioning relies on Rancher’s internal bootstrap and control plane providers alongside Rancher Node Drivers (via `rancher/machine`) as the infrastructure provider. This new mode allows you to substitute Rancher Node Drivers with native CAPI infrastructure providers while retaining Rancher’s bootstrap and control plane logic.

> 

Reviewer: Moved down from top admonition, I believe it's better served in the overview.

:::note
Provisioning with native CAPI infrastructure provider and Rancher as a bootstrap and control plane provider is distinct from using [Rancher Turtles](https://turtles.docs.rancher.com/turtles/stable/en/index.html) and the [CAPRKE2](https://caprke2.docs.rancher.com/) provider to provision a RKE2 cluster and subsequently import it into Rancher.
:::

### Limitations and requirements

- Unsupported configurations: Windows worker nodes and IPv6 are currently not supported.
- UI constraints: Detailed cluster management via the UI is disabled; clusters must be created and modified by applying Kubernetes objects to the local cluster. However, the Cluster Explorer remains accessible.
- Kubernetes cloud provider requirements: A cloud-specific Kubernetes provider for the infrastructure where the downstream cluster runs is required (e.g., the [Kubernetes AWS Cloud Provider](https://cloud-provider-aws.sigs.k8s.io/) for CAPA or the `rancher-vsphere-cpi` chart for CAPV).

> This guide will provide examples on how to provision clusters in this mode, for both CAPA and CAPV.

Reviewer: Moved to above overview section

## General steps

For both CAPA and CAPV, the general steps are as follows:

1. Install Rancher.
1. Install a CAPI infrastructure provider, either CAPA or CAPV.
1. Set-up an identity resource for the provider.
1. Create a CAPI infrastructure cluster resource.
1. Create one or more CAPI infrastructure machine template resources.
1. Create a Rancher `clusters.provisioning.cattle.io` resource that references the identity, infrastructure cluster and infrastructure machine template resources.

> After applying the `clusters.provisioning.cattle.io` resource, the cluster will appear in the Rancher Cluster Management list (click on **☰ > Cluster Management**), but the detailed view for this type of cluster is currently unavailable.

Reviewer: Adjusted to [active voice phrasing](https://documentation.suse.com/style/current/html/style-guide-adoc/sec-language.html#sec-tone)

In this example, we'll use `AWSClusterStaticIdentity`.

Create a secret with your credentials:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: capa-lab-credentials
  namespace: capa-system
type: Opaque
stringData:
  AccessKeyID: <access key id>
  SecretAccessKey: <secret access key>
  # You might have a session token depending on your credential type.
  # SessionToken: <session token>
```

Then, create the identity object that references the secret:

```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: AWSClusterStaticIdentity
metadata:
  name: capa-lab-identity
spec:
  secretRef: capa-lab-credentials
  allowedNamespaces:
    # The namespace of the AWSCluster resource that will point
    # to this identity for provisioning.
    list:
      - fleet-default
```

Now, create the `AWSCluster` [resource](https://cluster-api-aws.sigs.k8s.io/crd/#infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io%2fv1beta2). This object will define infrastructure configuration common to all machine pools.

> CAPA will create VPCs, subnets, security groups and a load balancer in its default configuration, but additional rules must be configured to allow ports needed by Rancher and RKE2. For simplicity, this example defines additional security group rules that allow all traffic between the nodes, but more restrictive rules can be configured instead.

Reviewer: Adjusted for active voice phrasing

  rkeConfig:
    infrastructureRef:
      kind: VSphereCluster
      name: capv-lab
      namespace: fleet-default
      apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
    machinePools:
      - name: ctrl
        controlPlaneRole: true
        etcdRole: true
        workerRole: true
        quantity: 3
        machineConfigRef:
          kind: VSphereMachineTemplate
          name: capv-lab-control-plane
          namespace: fleet-default
          apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
    machineGlobalConfig:
      cni: calico
      disable-kube-proxy: false
      etcd-expose-metrics: false
      ingress-controller: traefik
      protect-kernel-defaults: false
      disable:
        - rancher-vsphere-csi
      cloud-provider-name: rancher-vsphere
    chartValues:
      rancher-vsphere-cpi:
        vCenter:
          datacenters: <your datacenter>
          host: <vsphere fqdn>
          # The credential secret will be transferred by the prebootstrap mechanism,
          # and the cpi chart will expect the default name (vsphere-cpi-creds).
          credentialsSecret:
            generate: false
```

### Changing machine templates

> Machine templates for CAPI infrastructure providers, such as `AWSMachineTemplate` and `VSphereMachineTemplate` are usually immutable. To modify the configuration of the instances in a machine pool, create a new template with a different name, then edit the machine pool in `clusters.provisioning.cattle.io` to point to this new template. This will cause all of the machines in that pool to be recreated with the new configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Machine templates for CAPI infrastructure providers, such as `AWSMachineTemplate` and `VSphereMachineTemplate` are usually immutable. To modify the configuration of the instances in a machine pool, create a new template with a different name, then edit the machine pool in `clusters.provisioning.cattle.io` to point to this new template. This causes all machines in that pool to be recreated with the new configuration.
```
